Documentation for hooks core (#154)
glotzerlab/signac-docs: docs/source/hooks.rst

.. _hooks:

=====
Hooks
=====

.. _hooks_introduction:

Introduction
============

One of the goals of the :py:class:`~signac` framework is to make it easy to track the provenance of research data
and to ensure its reproducibility.

> Hooks make it possible to track these state changes in a project.

Author: ```suggestion
Hooks make it possible to track state changes to each job in a project.
```

In general, a hook is a function that is called at a specific point relative to the execution of an operation.

Hooks execute code adjacent to key steps of an operation,
such as when it begins, finishes, or fails. These events are
called triggers.

> Hooks help track where an execution's data originated, and which operations were applied to the data.

Author: I prefer "track an execution's data" since it's more specific -- it refers to which pieces of code and how the code looks at the time the data was generated, while "track a job's data" is more ambiguous since it lacks the temporal implication. Is "an execution" to jargon-y?

and the :py:class:`Job` object.

:py:class:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook` can be used to store basic information about the execution of a job operation in the job document.

In the following example, either the function ``store_success_to_doc`` executes after the
:py:class:`~flow.project.JobOperation`, ``foo``, exits without error, or ``store_error_to_doc`` executes after ``foo``
exits with error:

.. code-block:: python

    # project.py
    from flow import FlowProject

    class Project(FlowProject):
        pass

    def store_success_to_doc(operation_name, job):
        job.doc.update({f'{operation_name}_success': True})

    def store_error_to_doc(operation_name, error, job):
        job.doc.update({f'{operation_name}_success': False})

    @FlowProject.operation
    @FlowProject.add_hook.on_success(store_success_to_doc)
    @FlowProject.add_hook.on_fail(store_error_to_doc)
    @FlowProject.post.isfile("result.txt")
    def foo(job):
        if job.sp.a == 0:
            # Have jobs with statepoint 'a' == 0 fail
            raise ValueError

    if __name__ == '__main__':
       FlowProject().main()

> If ``foo`` is executed using ``python project.py run -o foo -f a 1``, the hook triggered ``on_success`` will run,
> and ``job.doc.get("foo_success") == True``.
> 
> If ``foo`` is executed using ``python project.py run -o foo -f a 0``, a ``ValueError`` is raised.
> The hook triggered ``on_fail`` will run, and ``job.doc.get("foo_success") == False``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If ``foo`` is executed using ``python project.py run -o foo -f a 1``, the hook triggered ``on_success`` will run,
and `job.doc.foo_success` will be ``True``.

If ``foo`` is executed using ``python project.py run -o foo -f a 0``, a ``ValueError`` is raised.
The hook triggered ``on_fail`` will run, and ``job.doc.foo_success`` will be ``False``.
```

.. _hooks:

=====
Hooks
=====

.. _hooks_introduction:

Introduction
============

One of the goals of the :py:class:`~signac` framework is to make it easy to track the provenance of research data
and to ensure its reproducibility.
Hooks make it possible to track these state changes in a project.
In general, a hook is a function that is called at a specific point relative to the execution of an operation.

Hooks execute code adjacent to key steps of an operation,
such as when it begins, finishes, or fails. These events are
called triggers with respect to hooks.
Hooks help track where the data for each execution came from, and which operations were applied to them.
For example, operation failures may be tracked in the job document.

> Hooks also make it possible to record the git commit ID upon execution of an operation,

Reviewer: I think we can add this to recipes and link to that

    @FlowProject.post.isfile("result.txt")
    def foo(job):
        if job.sp.a == 0:
            # Have jobs with statepoint 'a' == 0 fail
            raise ValueError

    if __name__ == '__main__':
       FlowProject().main()

If ``foo`` is executed using ``python project.py run -o foo -f a 1``, the hook triggered ``on_success`` will run,
and ``job.doc.get("foo_success") == True``.

If ``foo`` is executed using ``python project.py run -o foo -f a 0``, a ``ValueError`` is raised.
The hook triggered ``on_fail`` will run, and ``job.doc.get("foo_success") == False``.

.. note::

    Unlike :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_start`, :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_finish`,
    and :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_on_success`,
    which accept functions that take ``operation_name`` and ``job`` as arguments,
    :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_fail` accepts functions that take ``operation_name``, ``error``,
    and ``job`` as arguments.

.. _project-level hooks:

Project-Level Hooks
===================

In some cases, it may be desirable to install the same hook or set of hooks for all operations in a project.

> A custom set of hooks may be installed by a custom ``install_hooks`` method:

Reviewer 2: it's not clear to me where a ``install_hooks`` method is here

Author: Ah that's because there isn't one. I couldn't think of a simple, straight forward example that creates a hook system in a class. I changed it so it reflects the text, but it feels a bit contrived. What do you think?

Project-level hooks are called for every operation in the flow project.

.. note::

    Hooks are run in the environment of the python process from which you call **flow**.
    For this reason,
    hooks will not have access to modules in a singularity container if you use that as your execution directive.

.. _operation hooks:

Operation Hooks
===============

Hooks may be added to individual operations using decorators.
The :py:class:`~flow.hook` decorator tells :py:class`~signac` to run a
hook (or set of hooks) when an operation reaches any of the following triggers:
* :py:meth:`~flow.hook.on_start` will execute when the operation begins execution.
* :py:meth:`~flow.hook.on_finish` will execute when the operation exits, with or without error.
* :py:meth:`~flow.hook.on_success` will execute when the operation exits without error.
* :py:meth:`~flow.hook.on_fail` will execute when the operation exits with error.

The :py:class:`~flow.hook` decorator accepts objects as a function of the job operation
(:py:class:`~flow.project.JobOperation`).
The decorators :py:meth:`~flow.hook.on_start`, :py:meth:`~flow.hook.on_finish`, and :py:class:`~flow.hook.on_start`

> accept functions with two parameters: the operation name and the :py:class:`Job` object.

Reviewer 3: These `hook` references point to nothing. There is the class `flow.hooks.Hook` and the attribute `flow.FlowProject.hook`.

> accept functions with two parameters: the operation name and the :py:class:`Job` object.

Author: I'm not sure. This hasn't been tested with aggregation yet. I'm pretty sure it's just the job object when aggregation is not involved.

> accept functions with two parameters: the operation name and the :py:class:`Job` object.

Reviewer: Yes, it is a tuple. I tried adding a hook to the plotting example here: https://github.com/glotzerlab/signac-examples/tree/08327e08a22104e2920bda0676205b132f0a0a27/projects/flow.aggregation-plotting/src

Here is what I added to make the hook work:

```python
...

def store_success_to_doc(operation_name, *jobs):
    for job in jobs:
        job.doc.update({f'{operation_name}_success': True})

@aggregator.groupby("crystal", sort_by="density")
@Project.operation
@Project.operation_hooks.on_success(store_success_to_doc)
def plot_pressure_by_crystal(*jobs):
    ...
```

In the following example, either the function ``store_success_to_doc`` executes after the
:py:class:`~flow.project.JobOperation`, ``foo``, exits without error, or ``store_error_to_doc`` executes after ``foo``
exits with error:

.. code-block:: python

    # project.py
    from flow import FlowProject

    class Project(FlowProject):
        pass

    def store_success_to_doc(operation_name, job):
        job.doc.update({f'{operation_name}_success': True})

    def store_error_to_doc(operation_name, error, job):
        job.doc.update({f'{operation_name}_success': False})

    @FlowProject.operation
    @FlowProject.hook.on_success(store_success_to_doc)
    @FlowProject.hook.on_fail(store_error_to_doc)
    @FlowProject.post.isfile("result.txt")
    def foo(job):
        if job.sp.a == 0:
            # Have jobs with statepoint 'a' == 0 fail
            raise ValueError

    if __name__ == '__main__':
       FlowProject().main()

If ``foo`` is executed using ``python project.py run -o foo -f a 1``, the hook triggered ``on_success`` will run,
and ``job.doc.get("foo_success") == True``.

If ``foo`` is executed using ``python project.py run -o foo -f a 0``, a ``ValueError`` is raised.

> The hook triggered ``on_fail`` will run, and ``job.doc.get("foo_success") == False``.

Author: Where does this assign to a function call?

> The hook triggered ``on_fail`` will run, and ``job.doc.get("foo_success") == False``.

Reviewer: @klywang's right but I think we can make this writeup cleaner

.. _hooks:

=====
Hooks
=====

.. _hooks_introduction:

Introduction
============

One of the goals of the **signac** framework is to make it easy to track the provenance of research data and to ensure its reproducibility.
Hooks make it possible to track state changes to each job in a **signac** project as the :ref:`FlowProject<flow-project>` operates on it.

A hook is a function that is called at a specific point relative to the execution of a **signac-flow** :ref:`operation<operations>`.
A hook is triggered when an operation starts, exits, succeeds, or fails.

> A basic use case is to log the success/failure of an operation by creating a hook that sets a job document value ``job.doc.operation_success`` to ``True`` or ``False``.

Reviewer: I want to make it clear how this is different from checking flow status.

A hook is triggered when an operation starts, exits, succeeds, or fails.

A basic use case is to log the success/failure of an operation by creating a hook that sets a job document value ``job.doc.operation_success`` to ``True`` or ``False``.
Additionally, a user may record the `git commit ID <https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Viewing-the-Commit-History>`_ upon the start of an operation, allowing them to track which version of code ran the operation.

.. _hook_triggers:

Hook Triggers
=============

The following triggers are provided:

1. :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_start` will execute when the operation begins execution.
2. :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_exit` will execute when the operation exits, with or without error.
3. :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_success` will execute when the operation exits without error.
4. :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_error` will execute when the operation exits with error.

Hooks can be installed at the :ref:`operation level <operation hooks>` or at the :ref:`flow-project level<project-level hooks>`.
Project-level hooks are called for every operation in the flow project.

.. note::

>     Hooks are run in the environment of the python process from which you call FlowProject.main().

Reviewer: Need to add the proper reference to how flow is run.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    Hooks are run in the Python process where ``FlowProject.main()`` is called.
```

Project-level hooks are called for every operation in the flow project.

.. note::

    Hooks are run in the environment of the python process from which you call FlowProject.main().
    For this reason, hooks will not have access to modules in a container specified in the :term:`executable directive<executable>`.

.. _operation hooks:

Operation Hooks
===============

Hooks may be added to individual operations using decorators.
The :py:class:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook` decorator tells :py:class:`~signac` to run a hook (or set of hooks) when an operation reaches the specified trigger.

The :py:class:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook` decorator accepts objects as a function of the job operation (:py:class:`~flow.project.JobOperation`).

The decorators :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_start` and  :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_exit` accept functions with two parameters: the operation name and the :py:class:`Job` object.
The decorator :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_error`, accepts functions with three parameters: the operation name, the output error, and the :py:class:`Job` object.

> Unlike :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_start`, :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_exit`,  and :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_success`, which accept functions that take ``operation_name`` and ``job`` as arguments, :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_error` accepts functions that take ``operation_name``, ``error``, and ``job`` as arguments.

Reviewer: The bottom version was in a "note", but these are basically the same info.

Because the number of arguments matters for project-level-hooks too, I want to condense these and move it to the section that talks about kinds of triggers available.

Reviewer: See also the draft text I added to the trigger section

.. _operation-hooks:

Operation Hooks
===============

Hooks may be added to individual operations using decorators.
The :py:class:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks` decorator tells **signac-flow** to run a hook (or set of hooks) when an operation reaches the specified trigger.

An operation hook can be used to store basic information about the execution of a job operation in the job document.
In the following example, if the test operation ``error_on_a_0`` raises an exception, the hook function ``store_error_to_doc`` will be executed.
Otherwise, ``store_success_to_doc`` will be executed.

.. code-block:: python

    # project.py
    from flow import FlowProject

    class Project(FlowProject):
        pass

    def store_success_to_doc(operation_name, job):
        job.doc.update({f'{operation_name}_success': True})

    def store_error_to_doc(operation_name, error, job):
        job.doc.update({f'{operation_name}_success': False})

    @Project.operation
    @Project.operation_hooks.on_success(store_success_to_doc)
    @Project.operation_hooks.on_exception(store_error_to_doc)
    def error_on_a_0(job):
        if job.sp.a == 0:

>             # Have jobs with statepoint 'a' == 0 fail

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
            # Have jobs with state point 'a' == 0 fail
```

>             # Have jobs with state point 'a' == 0 fail

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
The code makes this fairly clear as well as the function name.

 .. code-block:: python

    from flow import FlowProject

    class Project(FlowProject):
        pass

    @Project.operation
    @Project.post.true('test_ran')
    def do_operation(job):
        job.doc.test_ran = True

    @Project.operation
    @Project.pre.after(do_operation)
    @Project.post.false('test_ran')
    def undo_operation(job):
        job.doc.test_ran = False

    def track_start_time(operation_name, job):
        import time
        current_time = time.strftime('%b %d, %Y at %l:%M:%S %p %Z')
        doc_key = f'{operation_name}_start_times'
        job.doc.setdefault(doc_key, [])
        job.doc[doc_key].append(current_time)

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        project = Project()
        project.project_hooks.on_start = [track_start_time]
        project.main()

A custom set of hooks may also be installed at the project level by a custom ``install_hooks`` method.

.. code-block:: python

    # project.py
    from flow import FlowProject

    class Project(FlowProject):
        pass

    @Project.operation
    @Project.post.true('test_ran')
    def do_operation(job):
        job.doc.test_ran = True

    # Define custom hooks class.

>     # This can be done in a separate file and imported into the project.py file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
This comment is unnecessary for basic documentation on the feature.

.. _hooks:

=====
Hooks
=====

.. _hooks_introduction:

Introduction
============

One of the goals of the :py:class:`~signac` framework is to make it easy to track the provenance of research data
and to ensure its reproducibility.
Hooks make it possible to track state changes to each job in a project.
In general, a hook is a function that is called at a specific point relative to the execution of an operation.

Hooks execute code adjacent to key steps of an operation,
such as when it begins, finishes, or fails. These events are
called triggers.

For example, operation failures may be tracked in the job document as `job.doc['operation_success'] = False`,

> while operation successes may be tracked in the job document as `job.doc['operation_success'] = True`.

Reviewer 4: Code snippets need two backticks.
```suggestion
For example, operation failures may be tracked in the job document as ``job.doc['operation_success'] = False``, while operation successes may be tracked in the job document as ``job.doc['operation_success'] = True``.
```

Hooks can be used to track where a job's data originated and which operations were applied to the data.
For examples, users may record the `git commit ID <https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Viewing-the-Commit-History>`_ upon execution of an operation,
allowing users to track which version of code was used to run the operation.

Hooks can be installed at the :ref:`operation level <operation hooks>`
or at the :ref:`flow-project level<project-level hooks>`, as shown below.
Project-level hooks are called for every operation in the flow project.

.. note::

    Hooks are run in the environment of the python process from which you call **flow**.
    For this reason,
    hooks will not have access to modules in a container if you use that as your execution directive.

.. _operation hooks:

Operation Hooks
===============

Hooks may be added to individual operations using decorators.
The :py:class:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook` decorator tells :py:class:`~signac` to run a

> hook (or set of hooks) when an operation reaches any of the following triggers:
>     * :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_start` will execute when the operation begins execution.
>     * :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_finish` will execute when the operation exits, with or without error.
>     * :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_success` will execute when the operation exits without error.
>     * :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_fail` will execute when the operation exits with error.

Reviewer 4: Try this. A new line is probably needed here.
```suggestion
hook (or set of hooks) when an operation reaches any of the following triggers:

    * :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_start` will execute when the operation begins execution.
    * :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_finish` will execute when the operation exits, with or without error.
    * :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_success` will execute when the operation exits without error.
    * :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.add_hook.on_fail` will execute when the operation exits with error.
```

A hook is a function that is called at a specific point relative to the execution of a **signac-flow** :ref:`operation<operations>`.
A hook is triggered when an operation starts, exits, succeeds, or raises an exception.

A basic use case is to log the success/failure of an operation by creating a hook that sets a job document value ``job.doc.operation_success`` to ``True`` or ``False``.
Additionally, a user may record the `git commit ID <https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Viewing-the-Commit-History>`_ upon the start of an operation, allowing them to track which version of code ran the operation.

.. _hook_triggers:

Triggers
=============

The following triggers are provided:

1. :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_start` will execute when the operation begins execution.
2. :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_exit` will execute when the operation exits, with or without error.
3. :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_success` will execute when the operation exits without error.
4. :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_exception` will execute when the operation exits with error.

> Hooks can be installed at the :ref:`operation level <operation-hooks>` or at the :ref:`flow-project level<project-level-hooks>`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Hooks can be installed at the :ref:`operation level <operation-hooks>` or at the :ref:`FlowProject level <project-level-hooks>`.
```

Reviewer: Should we also update the heading?

> Project-level hooks are called for every operation in the flow project.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
FlowProject-level hooks are called for every operation in the FlowProject.
```

> The hooks created with triggers :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_start`, :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_exit`,  and :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_success` require two arguments: the operation name and the :py:class:`signac.contrib.job.Job` object. Hooks created to trigger :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_exception` require three arguments: the operation name, the output error, and the job object.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The hooks created with triggers :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_start`, :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_exit`, and :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_success` require two arguments: the operation name and the :py:class:`signac.contrib.job.Job` object.
Hooks created to trigger :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_exception` require three arguments: the operation name, the output error, and the job object.
```

Reviewer 4: How are aggregates handled?

Reviewer: See comment here where I got aggregation to work. https://github.com/glotzerlab/signac-docs/pull/154#discussion_r825338794

Not sure how to test it or describe it fully.

.. note::

    Hooks are run in the environment of the python process from which you call FlowProject.main().

>     For this reason, hooks will not have access to modules in a container specified in the :term:`executable directive<executable>`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    For this reason, hooks will not have access to modules in a container specified in the :term:`executable directive <executable>`.
```

.. _operation-hooks:

Operation Hooks
===============

Hooks may be added to individual operations using decorators.

> The :py:class:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks` decorator tells :py:class:`~signac` to run a hook (or set of hooks) when an operation reaches the specified trigger.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The :py:class:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks` decorator tells **signac-flow** to run a hook (or set of hooks) when an operation reaches the specified trigger.
```

> The :py:class:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks` decorator accepts objects as a function of the job operation (:py:class:`~flow.project.JobOperation`).

Reviewer 4: This sentence doesn't make sense to me.

Also we have had reservations about keeping `JobOperation` as a public class name, since adding groups and aggregations. If there a way to state whatever this is saying without referring to `JobOperation` directly, that would be better.

Reviewer 4: Typically I don't see decorators described as "taking an argument." While this is technically true, it may be confusing to users who think of
```python
@decorator
def func():
    pass
```
as "`decorator` decorates `func`" and not that `decorator` takes `func` as an argument.

Reviewer 4: After reviewing it in context again, I would just delete this sentence. It neither fully explains how function decorators work nor provides specific information to this application of function decorators. (Also delete a newline so that there is one blank line between paragraphs instead of two.)
```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer 4: Extra blank line here.
```suggestion
```

An operation hook can be used to store basic information about the execution of a job operation in the job document.

> In the following example, when our test operation ``error_on_a_0`` generates an error, the hook function ``store_error_to_doc`` executes.

Reviewer 4: This document bounces around a fair amount between using plural first and second-person we/you/our and avoiding them. I think it might be best to avoid these words based on the informational style of this document.

Also I prefer "raise an exception" instead of "generate an error."
```suggestion
In the following example, when the test operation ``error_on_a_0`` raises an exception, the hook function ``store_error_to_doc`` executes.
```

Otherwise, ``store_success_to_doc`` executes.

.. code-block:: python

    # project.py
    from flow import FlowProject

    class Project(FlowProject):
        pass

    def store_success_to_doc(operation_name, job):
        job.doc.update({f'{operation_name}_success': True})

    def store_error_to_doc(operation_name, error, job):
        job.doc.update({f'{operation_name}_success': False})

    @Project.operation
    @Project.operation_hooks.on_success(store_success_to_doc)
    @Project.operation_hooks.on_exception(store_error_to_doc)
    @Project.post.isfile("result.txt")
    def error_on_a_0(job):
        if job.sp.a == 0:
            # Have jobs with statepoint 'a' == 0 fail

>             raise ValueError

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
            raise RuntimeError("Cannot process jobs with a == 0.")
```

    if __name__ == '__main__':

>        Project().main()

Reviewer 4: Check indentation, I think this is short one space?
```suggestion
        Project().main()
```

> If ``error_on_a_0`` is executed using ``python project.py run --operation error_on_a_0 --filter a 1``, the hook triggered ``on_success`` will run, and ``job.doc.error_on_a_0_success`` will be ``True``.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If ``error_on_a_0`` is executed using ``python project.py run --operation error_on_a_0 --filter a 1``, the ``on_success`` hook trigger will run, and ``job.doc.error_on_a_0_success`` will be ``True``.
```

> If ``error_on_a_0`` is executed using ``python project.py run --operation error_on_a_0 --filter a 0``, a ``ValueError`` is raised.
> The hook triggered ``on_exception`` will run, and ``job.doc.error_on_a_0_success`` will be ``False``.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If ``error_on_a_0`` is executed using ``python project.py run --operation error_on_a_0 --filter a 0``, a ``RuntimeError`` is raised.
The ``on_exception`` hook trigger will run, and ``job.doc.error_on_a_0_success`` will be ``False``.
```

.. _project-level-hooks:

Project-Level Hooks
===================

It may be desirable to install the same hook or set of hooks for all operations in a project.
In the following example FlowProject, the hook ``track_start_time`` is triggered when each operation starts.
The hook appends the current time to a list in the job document that is named based on the name of the operation.

 .. code-block:: python

    from flow import FlowProject

    class Project(FlowProject):
        pass

    @Project.operation
    @Project.post.true('test_ran')
    def do_operation(job):
        job.doc.test_ran = True

    @Project.operation
    @Project.pre.after(do_operation)
    @Project.post.false('test_ran')
    def undo_operation(job):
        job.doc.test_ran = False

    def track_start_time(operation_name, job):
        import time
        current_time = time.strftime('%b %d, %Y at %l:%M:%S %p %Z')
        doc_key = f'{operation_name}_start_times'
        times = job.doc.get(doc_key, [])
        times.append(current_time)
        job.doc[doc_key] = times

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        project = Project()

>         project.project_hooks.on_start.append(track_start_time)

Reviewer 4: Assignment might be clearer?
```suggestion
        project.project_hooks.on_start = [track_start_time]
```

        project.main()

A custom set of hooks may also be installed at the project level by a custom ``install_hooks`` method.

.. code-block:: python

    # project.py
    from flow import FlowProject

    class Project(FlowProject):
        pass

    @Project.operation
    @Project.post.true('test_ran')
    def do_operation(job):
        job.doc.test_ran = True

    # Define custom hooks class.
    # This can be done in a separate file and imported into the project.py file.
    class ProjectHooks:

        def __init__(self, project):
            self.project = project

        def set_job_doc(self, key):
            def set_true(operation_name, job):
                job.doc[f"{operation_name}_{key}"] = True
            return set_true

        def set_job_doc_with_error(self):
            def set_false(operation_name, error, job):

>                 job.doc[f"{operation_name}_success"] = True

Reviewer 4: True should be False here.
```suggestion
                job.doc[f"{operation_name}_success"] = False
```

Reviewer 4: Why does the structure of `set_job_doc_with_error` not accept a key `success` like the other?

            return set_false

        def install_hooks(self):
            self.project.project_hooks.on_start.append(self.set_job_doc("start"))
            self.project.project_hooks.on_success.append(self.set_job_doc("success"))
            self.project.project_hooks.on_exception.append(self.set_job_doc_with_error())
            return self.project

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        project = Project()

>         ProjectHooks(project).install_hooks().main()

Reviewer 4: I would separate these lines to make it clear that the `install_hooks` method mutates the project and returns it.
```suggestion
        project = ProjectHooks(project).install_hooks()
        project.main()
```

Design question: why is `project` an argument to the `ProjectHooks` constructor and not an argument to `install_hooks`? e.g. `ProjectHooks().install_hooks(project)` rather than `ProjectHooks(project).install_hooks()`.

.. _hooks:

=====
Hooks
=====

.. _hooks_introduction:

Introduction
============

One of the goals of the **signac** framework is to make it easy to track the provenance of research data and to ensure its reproducibility.

> Hooks make it possible to execute user-defined functions before or after :ref:`FlowProject<flow-project>` operations act on a **signac** project.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Hooks make it possible to execute user-defined functions before or after :ref:`FlowProject <flow-project>` operations act on a **signac** project.
```

For example, hooks can be used to track state changes before and after each operation.

A hook is a function that is called at a specific time relative to the execution of a **signac-flow** :ref:`operation <operations>`.
A hook can be triggered when an operation starts, exits, succeeds, or raises an exception.

A basic use case is to log the success/failure of an operation by creating a hook that sets a job document value ``job.doc.operation_success`` to ``True`` or ``False``.
As another example, a user may record the `git commit ID <https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Viewing-the-Commit-History>`_ upon the start of an operation, allowing them to track which version of code ran the operation.

.. _hook_triggers:

> Triggers
> =============

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Triggers
========
```

The following triggers are provided:

1. :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_start` will execute when the operation begins execution.
2. :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_exit` will execute when the operation exits, with or without an exception.
3. :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_success` will execute when the operation exits without an exception.
4. :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_exception` will execute when the operation exits with an exception.

Hooks can be installed at the :ref:`operation level <operation-hooks>` or at the :ref:`FlowProject level <project-level-hooks>`.
FlowProject-level hooks are called for every operation in the FlowProject.

> The hooks created with triggers :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_start`, :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_exit`, and :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_success` require two arguments: the operation name and the :py:class:`signac.contrib.job.Job` object.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Hooks triggered by :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_start`, :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_exit`, and :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_success` are called with two arguments: the operation name (or group name) and the :py:class:`signac.contrib.job.Job` object (or ``*jobs`` if used with aggregation).
```

> Hooks created to trigger :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_exception` require three arguments: the operation name, the output error, and the job object.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Hooks triggered by :py:meth:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks.on_exception` are called with three arguments: the operation name (or group name), the exception raised, and the job (or ``*jobs`` if used with aggregation).
```

.. note::

    Hooks are run in the Python process where ``FlowProject.main()`` is called.
    For this reason, hooks will not have access to modules in a container specified in the :term:`executable directive <executable>`.

.. _operation-hooks:

Operation Hooks
===============

Hooks may be added to individual operations using decorators.
The :py:class:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks` decorator tells **signac-flow** to run a hook (or set of hooks) when an operation reaches the specified trigger.

The :py:class:`~flow.FlowProject.operation_hooks` decorator accepts objects as a function of the job operation (:py:class:`~flow.project.JobOperation`).

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

An operation hook can be used to store basic information about the execution of a job operation in the job document.

> In the following example, when the test operation ``error_on_a_0`` raises an exception, the hook function ``store_error_to_doc`` executes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the following example, if the test operation ``error_on_a_0`` raises an exception, the hook function ``store_error_to_doc`` will be executed.
```

> Otherwise, ``store_success_to_doc`` executes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Otherwise, ``store_success_to_doc`` will be executed.
```

.. code-block:: python

    # project.py
    from flow import FlowProject

    class Project(FlowProject):
        pass

    def store_success_to_doc(operation_name, job):
        job.doc.update({f'{operation_name}_success': True})

    def store_error_to_doc(operation_name, error, job):
        job.doc.update({f'{operation_name}_success': False})

    @Project.operation
    @Project.operation_hooks.on_success(store_success_to_doc)
    @Project.operation_hooks.on_exception(store_error_to_doc)

>     @Project.post.isfile("result.txt")

Reviewer 4: This postcondition is distracting from the point of the example.
```suggestion
```

    def error_on_a_0(job):
        if job.sp.a == 0:
            # Have jobs with statepoint 'a' == 0 fail
            raise RuntimeError("Cannot process jobs with a == 0.")

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        Project().main()

> If ``error_on_a_0`` is executed using ``python project.py run --operation error_on_a_0 --filter a 1``, the ``on_success`` hook trigger will run, and ``job.doc.error_on_a_0_success`` will be ``True``.

Reviewer 4: It may be helpful to remind the reader that `error_on_a_0` is an operation name. At least, I had to refresh myself by reading the code again to see what that name was.
```suggestion
If the operation ``error_on_a_0`` is executed on jobs with state point key ``a`` equal to 1 using ``python project.py run --operation error_on_a_0 --filter a 1``, the ``on_success`` hook trigger will run, and ``job.doc.error_on_a_0_success`` will be ``True``.
```

> If ``error_on_a_0`` is executed using ``python project.py run --operation error_on_a_0 --filter a 0``, a ``RuntimeError`` is raised.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the operation ``error_on_a_0`` is executed on jobs with state point key ``a`` equal to 0 using ``python project.py run --operation error_on_a_0 --filter a 0``, a ``RuntimeError`` is raised.
```

The ``on_exception`` hook trigger will run, and ``job.doc.error_on_a_0_success`` will be ``False``.

.. _project-level-hooks:

Project-Level Hooks
===================

It may be desirable to install the same hook or set of hooks for all operations in a project.
In the following example FlowProject, the hook ``track_start_time`` is triggered when each operation starts.
The hook appends the current time to a list in the job document that is named based on the name of the operation.

 .. code-block:: python

    from flow import FlowProject

    class Project(FlowProject):
        pass

    @Project.operation
    @Project.post.true('test_ran')
    def do_operation(job):
        job.doc.test_ran = True

    @Project.operation
    @Project.pre.after(do_operation)
    @Project.post.false('test_ran')
    def undo_operation(job):
        job.doc.test_ran = False

    def track_start_time(operation_name, job):
        import time
        current_time = time.strftime('%b %d, %Y at %l:%M:%S %p %Z')
        doc_key = f'{operation_name}_start_times'

>         times = job.doc.get(doc_key, [])
>         times.append(current_time)
>         job.doc[doc_key] = times

Reviewer 4: This is equivalent. Feel free to reject if you think the existing form is more readable.
```suggestion
        job.doc.setdefault(doc_key, [])
        job.doc[doc_key].append(current_time)
```

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        project = Project()
        project.project_hooks.on_start = [track_start_time]
        project.main()

A custom set of hooks may also be installed at the project level by a custom ``install_hooks`` method.

.. code-block:: python

    # project.py
    from flow import FlowProject

    class Project(FlowProject):
        pass

    @Project.operation
    @Project.post.true('test_ran')
    def do_operation(job):
        job.doc.test_ran = True

    # Define custom hooks class.
    # This can be done in a separate file and imported into the project.py file.

>     class ProjectHooks:
> 
>         def __init__(self, project):
>             self.project = project
> 
>         def set_job_doc(self, key):
>             def set_true(operation_name, job):
>                 job.doc[f"{operation_name}_{key}"] = True
>             return set_true
> 
>         def set_job_doc_with_error(self, key):
>             def set_false(operation_name, error, job):
>                 job.doc[f"{operation_name}_{key}"] = False
>             return set_false
> 
>         def install_hooks(self):
>             self.project.project_hooks.on_start.append(self.set_job_doc("start"))
>             self.project.project_hooks.on_success.append(self.set_job_doc("success"))
>             self.project.project_hooks.on_exception.append(self.set_job_doc_with_error("success"))
>             return self.project
> 
> 
>     if __name__ == '__main__':
>         project = Project()
>         project = ProjectHooks(project).install_hooks()
>         project.main()

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    class ProjectHooks:

        def set_job_doc(self, key):
            def set_true(operation_name, job):
                job.doc[f"{operation_name}_{key}"] = True
            return set_true

        def set_job_doc_with_error(self, key):
            def set_false(operation_name, error, job):
                job.doc[f"{operation_name}_{key}"] = False
            return set_false

        def install_hooks(self, project):
            project.project_hooks.on_start.append(self.set_job_doc("start"))
            project.project_hooks.on_success.append(self.set_job_doc("success"))
            project.project_hooks.on_exception.append(self.set_job_doc_with_error("success"))
            return project

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        project = Project()
        project = ProjectHooks().install_hooks(project)
        project.main()
```
